---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# Introduction: Network Means and Ends

### Kristoffer Gansing

## The Persistent Ending of Networks

The internet has already ended many times – at least, it has when
understood within the framework of network idealism, which, permeating
the preceding century, has only ‘heated up’ over the past fifty years of
globalization and the invention of the internet. ‘The revolution is
over. Welcome to the afterglow’, was the curatorial tagline of
transmediale 2014, formulated in light of the supposed wake-up call of
Edward Snowden’s revelations. A year later, *e-flux journal* published
its anthology *The Internet Does Not Exist*, including, among others,
Hito Steyerl’s essay ‘Too Much World: Is the Internet Dead?’.[^02GansingIntroduction_1] This
was back when the terms ‘post-digital’ and ‘post-internet’ were doing
the rounds, both in critical media practice, and as a
contemporary-art-world trend. Back then, the discussion was all about
the internet becoming a fact of life, beyond the digital information
exchange as such; impacting analog aesthetics, offline identities,
ecologies, and geopolitics. Of course, the (virtual) reality of global
financial networks (and their breakdowns) had already been reshaping
life, politics, and networks of all scales, for a long time. Now, just
as the financial sector remains largely obscure to the greater public,
so, too, has the network culture that emerged along with the web, been
subsumed within a larger framework of so-called digitalization
characterized by platforms, opaque artificial intelligence, and largely
invisible cloud infrastructures and services.

This is the age of platform and surveillance capitalism, in which, as
Geert Lovink contends in his essay for this volume, nobody talks about
networks anymore. The same fate seems to be slowly befalling the
internet and the web. The latter, whose thirty-year anniversary was in
March 2019, has come to be regarded as something as dreary as
television, a view that has only intensified as the streaming model has
claimed its dominance. According to Joel Waldfogel, consumers are now
living through a new ‘golden age’ of the cultural industries.[^02GansingIntroduction_2]
Certainly, if we are to believe the statistics, global revenue from
films, books, games, and music, has never been higher. If this *is* a
golden age, then it is one not so much for the users, as, ironically,
for those intermediaries that the network paradigm once promised to get
rid of by means of decentralization and end-to-end communication.

Cut to 2019, when a call for conference papers announces ‘The Ends of
Social Media’,[^02GansingIntroduction_3] and when, whenever we hear about networks it is
usually in the apocalyptic terms of network backlash: government-induced
internet blackouts, fake news, botnets, trolls, and hate speech. How to
reconcile the end of end-to-end – and, indeed, of liberal democracy –
with this ‘golden age’ of media content, in which the personalized media
revolution appears to have won out over the collective, and the network
to have persisted, but become opaque, polarized, and anything but
neutral? Maybe network idealism and the belief in net neutrality were
misguided to start with? Now that the more tangible limits of networks
are becoming visible, it might be time to readdress the network
question, which is ultimately about future models of sociality,
technology, and politics, in societies after globalization.

## The Network Is Everlasting

In 1967, Robert Filliou and George Brecht published a poem in which they
stated that ‘the network is everlasting’.[^02GansingIntroduction_4] This was a piece of
pre-internet culture, celebrating the interconnectedness of everyday
lives and activities across an emerging global world, with specific
relation to the authors’ practice of mail art, using the postal system
as a democratic means of communicational art-making. Filliou further
developed a poetic imaginary of ‘the eternal network’, referring both to
an existing network of post-avant-garde artist friends, and to ‘the
network’ as an overarching metaphor for the organization of work and
culture within this emerging world. As the art critic Lars Bang-Larsen
has observed, before the network ‘became dominated by digital
connotations’ it was ‘a social concept’.[^02GansingIntroduction_5] The starting point for this
book (and accompanying exhibition) is a strategic reactivation of
Filliou’s notion of ‘the eternal network’, as an idea(l) of network
culture beyond the technical reality of the actually existing one we
know from our day-to-day online experience. From networks as idea(l),
through the emergence and establishment of the internet and the
subsequent network culture – in a way, closing a loop between pre- and
post-internet reality.

In alignment with this perspective, the authors of this collection
address the potentials and limits of networks, whether by reflecting on
specific instances of critical network culture, and/or by suggesting new
lines of thought and practice that might serve to replace or modify the
network imaginary; whether referring to the multiple histories of
networks, and/or going beyond networks in their current, established
form(s). The book is an extension of the *End to End* transmediale 2020
festival in Berlin, which also features an exhibition entitled ‘The
Eternal Network’.

In the context of the vast contemporary technological, social, cultural,
economic (and so forth), transformation known simply as
‘digitalization’, the book and exhibition ask what the current status of
the network *is*. Here ‘the network’ implies both the paradigm of
network idealism that emerged in the twentieth century – the network
idea, as a positive, organizing social factor, if you will – as well as
what could be called the ‘actually existing’ network culture that
co-evolved with the technical network of the internet and the World Wide
Web, during the 1990s and beyond. The book and exhibition each attempt
to explore the limits of networks, and of ‘the network’ – as, at once, a
cultural and aesthetic imaginary, as well as a technological form –
seeking forgotten and potential futures, with or without networks.
Particular attention is paid to the legacies of a certain brand of
critical internet and network culture that developed in Europe (and
beyond) throughout the 1990s, offering alternatives to the
entrepreneurial ideals and solutionism of Silicon Valley.

## From Networks to Networlds

The book’s first section, ‘Networks and Networlds’, opens with Clemens
Apprich’s essay, ‘The Never-ending Network’, in which Deleuze and
Guattari make a network-theory comeback; not in the form of their famous
rhizome metaphor, but rather the idea of network logic producing eternal
repetitions of the same. Rather than adopting a static model of
sameness, however, Apprich argues that there is a capitalization of the
difference-through-repetition of networked subjectivity, in how it
constantly translates into the lucrative data points of platforms. For
Apprich, there is a performative dimension to this algorithmic play of
the same and the different which opens up the possibility of open-ended
and never-ending networks, and, with it, of a new politics. In her
contribution, ‘Networks and Life-worlds’, Daphne Dragona turns to the
‘ends’ of networks from another point of view, relating network nodes to
the world-ending potential of the climate crisis. Pointing to the
information networks that have enabled the perception and knowledge of
this immanent ending, Dragona critically scrutinizes the networked
sensory technologies and ideas that helped bring into being a
systems-theory view of the Earth and of ecology in the first place.
Similar to Apprich, Dragona does not end on a pessimistic note, instead
discussing the potential reconfiguration of constructive network
practices, while remaining aware of the limitations and pitfalls of
cybernetic rationalism. In a survey of four interventionist art and
design projects, Dragona sketches out new positions, queering common
narratives about the Earth’s systems, the biases of machine learning,
and geoengineering, in ways that make room for more-than-human existence
on a planetary scale.

Following this turn toward the field of ecological systems theory as an
offshoot of cybernetic network principles, the artist and designer Luiza
Prado de O. Martins’ contribution, ‘There Are Words and Worlds That Are
Truthful and True’ goes deeper into the despair and the politics of the
environmental crisis. Recounting a research trip to her native Brazil,
she describes meeting with marginalized communities within the framework
of attempting to establish what she calls ‘The Councils of the
Pluriversal’. Instead of formal meetings with fixed protocols, these
councils mutated into more fluid states of encounter between people,
(failing) ecosystems, and Indigenous thinking, aesthetics, and, most
importantly, local food ingredients. Here, cooking became the main
medium for reflecting on shared and different ancestries and histories,
as a means to connect and disconnect oppressive politics of identity and
reproduction with climate change and its precarious and increasingly
dangerous life-situations. In this way, the totalizing model of the
universal network gives way to something else: community and
communications, conducted according to the acknowledged existence of
multiple realities, and the urgent need to decolonize knowledge
cultures.

## Human, Nonhuman, and Networks In Between

The essay ‘Network Topologies: From the Early Web to Human Mesh
Networks’, by Alessandro Ludovico, opens the second section of the book,
devoted to the ‘Human, Nonhuman, and Networks In Between’. In his
account of the independent publishing network associated with his
long-running magazine, *Neural*, Ludovico highlights the changing
topologies that have informed our understanding of the net and networked
cultural production. Here again pre-internet mail-art networks come into
the picture, as important reference points for the creation of web-based
independent distribution infrastructures that were similarly playful and
collaborative in nature. Tracing these changing network topologies, from
mail art to net art, to today’s data-driven platforms, Ludovico calls
for a new movement of interdependent human-mesh networks, resisting the
drive toward ever-more separated network identities.

A persistent belief in (or return to?) alternative networks also informs
Rachel O'Dwyer’s piece, ‘Another Net Is Possible’, which at the same
time keeps a close tab on the now clear limitations of pirate utopias,
on- and offline. Analyzing community wireless networks within a wider
history of activists claiming the electromagnetic spectrum as a commons,
O'Dwyer sketches out the attendant drawbacks of such movements’ attempts
to overcome the neoliberal order, finding them to display uncannily
common characteristics including technofetishism, ‘open’ and
collaborative structures that are not so open or equal in practice, and
a drive always to scale up. Against these aspects of activist networks,
O'Dwyer pits practices of ‘inventive materiality’, such as Etherpunk’s
use of FM radio spectrum infrastructures for low-tech internet
communication. Such networks and their practitioners recognize their
limitations, she argues, regarding as strengths, instead of weaknesses,
the finite, local and messy nature of their interactions.

In the piece that follows, the focus of the conversation between Aay
Liparoto and Lorena Juan is a network project that, in a very conscious
way, works with the strengths of its own limitations. In ‘Everything We
Build’, they discuss the collaborative practice of the queer-feminist
wiki platform *Not Found On*, which Liparoto initiated in 2019. The
platform constitutes a rethinking, from an intersectional perspective,
of the way that collective and open-source projects and knowledge
resources are conducted and cared for. Offering a web service that is
closed to the general public, Liparoto and her collaborators attempt to
create the online equivalent of a ‘safe space’, for individuals (or
dividuals) and communities that, due to their precarious social status,
do not necessarily want to be exposed on so-called open and
participatory mainstream platforms. Recalling Flavia Dzodan’s cry, ‘My
feminism will be intersectional or it will be bullshit!’,[^02GansingIntroduction_6] it is
possible to see this project as a modification of earlier cyberfeminist
practices, adapting them to a post-digital public reality which is
characterized both by higher LGBTQIA+ visibility, and an alarming rise
in hate speech and hate crimes in the wake of right-wing politics.

Closing off this section, Johanna Bruckner’s text, ‘Molecular Sex and
Polymorphic Sensibilities’, is a speculative proposal for new types of
interspecies sexuality and subjectivity that could take us beyond
oppressive binaries. Just as quantum computing promises a world of
networks in which ones and zeroes simultaneously coexist with one
another, Bruckner’s artwork describes a fictive future sexbot that is
seemingly able to freely mutate from one state of being to another.
Taking its cue from a sea creature called the ‘brittle star’, this bot
is a portrait of social, technological, and bio-chemical entanglements,
as they exist in (non)human networks, after the impact of phenomena such
as micro-plastics. Following the writings of Karen Barad, the project
asks how the molecularization and indeterminacy of being, today, might
inform queer and hybrid futures better tooled to deal with current
technological, political and ecological changes.

## Endings and New Becomings

In the final section, ‘Endings and New Becomings’, Geert Lovink offers
an impassioned ‘Requiem for the Network’, reflecting on the possible
death not only of network culture, but also the particular brand of
critical and autonomous net cultures for which he himself helped to
advocate from the mid-1990s onwards. As is fitting, he doesn’t stay with
the nostalgic resentment of the aging internet critic: instead, by
introducing interviews, he turns the piece into a conversation with
multiple networked voices, offering up further perspectives on the fate
of networks in the age of platforms. By the end, it is clear that not
everything has been said on ‘the network question’. Lovink is still
hopeful for the prospects of organized networks, and for further
outgrowths of network culture, beyond the ‘smart’ and online boredom,
into worlds where tech, human, and nonhuman infrastructures are
necessarily ‘contaminated’ by one another, not least on the affective
plane.
Femke Snelting’s piece, ‘Other Geometries’*,* is another piece of
autocriticism written after the author’s participation in a 2018–19
transmediale Study Circle on the topic of ‘Affective Infrastructures’.
Reflecting on the collective work with which this interdisciplinary
circle was initially tasked, Snelting points to the limitations of
circular sociality for creating a dynamic infrastructure for collective
work. She goes on to address the limitations of node-based models of
distributed networks which have their foundation in Cold War-era notions
of ‘creating resilience’, arguing that, today, it is necessary to pay
greater attention to what happens *between* the nodes, and to create
less normative infrastructures. With reference to Zach Blas’s notion of
the ‘paranodal’, as well as Anna Lowenhaupt Tsing’s work with fungal
infrastructures as inspiration for geometries of relations beyond the
calculative, Snelting recalls that the study group was asked the
question of how to concretize and turn such geometries into ‘actual
tools and software’. The hesitant answer, according to Snelting, was
that these could only be both complex and concrete.

This neatly leads us to the final contribution of the volume: ‘Seven
Theses on the Fediverse and the Becoming of FLOSS’, by Aymeric Mansoux
and Roel Roscam Abbing. This is a thorough discussion of one of the most
significant developments in alternative network cultures of recent
years, reflecting many aspects of all that is discussed within the
volume, including questions of selective online presence, precarious
communities, platform independent and co-developed platform
infrastructures, and environmental sustainability. The authors discuss
how, in what they call the ‘latest episode of the never-ending saga of
net and computational culture’, the emergence of federated network
initiatives is challenging the established working methodologies of
FLOSS (Free/Libre and Open-Source Software). For Mansoux and Roscam
Abbing, this opens up new ways to accomplish crucial links between
independent media and the structures of owning, building, and
maintaining networks.

## ‘Digitalization’ – Sounds Like a 90s Party

It might seem a bit retro to be taking up the discussion of networks
today, as something more properly belonging to the 1990s along with
Manuel Castell’s thesis on *The* *Rise of the Network Society*,[^02GansingIntroduction_7]
actor-network theory, films such as *The Matrix*, and of course the mass
popularization of the internet through the World Wide Web. Today, even
within the larger contemporary debate on digitalization, networks have
come to figure as a hidden technical layer, rather than as something
whose discussion is, in itself, a cultural force. Meanwhile, however,
many other buzzwords and phenomena of thirty years or so ago are now
re-emerging, into what could well be called digitalization’s normative
phase. In many ways, the 1990s are back, or so it seems – only look at
the kind of topics that are at the forefront of today’s digital culture.
Virtual reality, immersion, artificial intelligence: all as present as
they were in the early multimedia years of the 1990s, and again in the
new millennium’s first five years of ‘new media’ hype. Of course, this
time around, there are differences in how those terms are used and
understood, as well as in the technical realities behind them. The
German media theorist Friedrich Kittler once famously wrote that ‘the
media age proceeds in jerks, like Turing’s paper strip.’[^02GansingIntroduction_8] From
today’s post-digital standpoint, it seems rather to proceed in parallel
loops in which the past continuously makes comebacks. What’s more, it
seems these loops are often slightly skewed, offering up some strange
returns.

## Network Backlash and The Old New Outside

If ‘the network’ is interesting, it is precisely as something slightly
out of tune with these other loops, as a forgotten component of
digitalization in the post-digital phase of the digital’s becoming
infrastructural. If we turn to the internet, its being hyped as a
thing-in-itself seems to have receded in favor of its being positioned
more as an infrastructural backbone for data-dependent services, and a
delivery platform for the streaming economy. Now, when ‘the internet’
and ‘networks’ appear in discussions of the consequences of
digitalization, it is often in the context of the previously mentioned
backlash against net culture. The internet sociologist Yochai Benkler’s
reformulation of ‘the wealth of nations’ as ‘the wealth of networks’[^02GansingIntroduction_9]
has transformed into ‘the poverty of networks’,[^02GansingIntroduction_10] as it is now the
limits, rather than the endless and universal possibilities of networks,
that are most tangible.

Arguably a defining moment for the network generation was when, twenty
years ago, Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri stated in *Empire* that there
was no longer any outside, and that all resistance now came from within,
postulating the multitude as a
form of disruptive counter-power of many particulars.[^02GansingIntroduction_11] Ironically,
the actual rise of ‘the network society’ could well be defined in terms
of the many battles waged against perceived ‘outsiders’ (who themselves
often take on networked forms) – from the ‘war on terror’ with its ‘axis
of evil’, to the so-called refugee crisis. Take, even, the marginalized
‘losers’ left out of today’s neoliberal democracies, victims of the
‘downward mobility’ that is now a core component of digital
societies,[^02GansingIntroduction_12] who are politically mobilized through social media
networks.

In spite of the toxicity, virality and resentment of many such
movements, don’t they actually point to the potential of networks to
generate outsides? Rather than lament the fall of Western liberalism and
deliberative democracy, might we not, instead, actuate this potential
for new social organization, both in and beyond networks, claiming the
new, post-representational politics to which it caters for socially
progressive forces? For the intersectional left, this would mean
engaging more actively with networks, taking into account their
now-more-tangible limits. This returns to what is meant, within this
project, by discussing the limit to networks – as a kind of mapping of
what network culture once was, and what it may or may not become, toward
reforming as well as refuting the same. The
strange return of ‘the network’: not, any longer, as the answer to
everything, but as a specific option within a new post-digital political
landscape.

The transmediale 2020 festival *End to End* and its accompanying
exhibition ‘The Eternal Network’ open-endedly explore this strange
return, even via exiting networks and imagining alternatives, such as
new internet infrastructures; queering networks, decolonizing networks,
catering to different scales of organization and sociopolitical
urgencies, and rejuvenating DIY practices. This volume also reflects on
some of the histories and legacies of the network, discussing critical
shifts and dis/continuities in order to reorient our understanding and
undertaking of critical network cultures in the present.

[^02GansingIntroduction_1]: Hito Steyerl, ‘Too Much World: Is the Internet Dead?’, in Julieta
    Aranda, Brian Kuan Wood, and Anton Vidokle (eds) *The Internet Does
    Not Exist*, Berlin: Sternberg Press, 2015, pp. 10-26.

[^02GansingIntroduction_2]: Joel Waldfogel, ‘How Digitization Has Created a Golden Age of
    Music, Movies, Books, and Television’, *Journal of Economic
    Perspectives* 3 (Summer, 2017): 95-214.

[^02GansingIntroduction_3]: Tero Karppi, ‘CFP: The Ends of Social Media Symposium Nov 15
    2019’, The Ends of Social Media, 30 May 2019,
    [https://theendsofsocialmedia.home.blog/2019/05/30/the-ends/](https://theendsofsocialmedia.home.blog/2019/05/30/the-ends/).

[^02GansingIntroduction_4]: Georges Brecht and Robert Filliou, *Games at the Cedilla, or the
    Cedilla Takes Off*, New York: Something Else Press, 1967.

[^02GansingIntroduction_5]: Lars Bang Larsen, *Networks*, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2014, p.
    13.

[^02GansingIntroduction_6]: Flavia Dzodan, ‘My feminism will be intersectional or it will be
    bullshit!’, *Tiger Beatdown*, 10 October 2011,
    [http://tigerbeatdown.com/2011/10/10/my-feminism-will-be-intersectional-or-it-will-be-bullshit/](http://tigerbeatdown.com/2011/10/10/my-feminism-will-be-intersectional-or-it-will-be-bullshit/).

[^02GansingIntroduction_7]: Manuel Castells, *The Rise of the Network Society*, Malden, MA:
    Blackwell, 1996.

[^02GansingIntroduction_8]: Friedrich Kittler, *Gramophone, Film, Typewriter*, trans. Geoffrey
    Winthrop-Young and Michael Wutz, Stanford: Stanford University
    Press, 1999, p. 18.

[^02GansingIntroduction_9]: Yochai Benkler, *The Wealth of Networks: How Social Production
    Transforms Markets and Freedom*, New Haven: Yale University Press,
    2006.

[^02GansingIntroduction_10]: David Berry, ‘The Poverty of Networks’, *Theory, Culture &
    Society* 7-8 (December, 2008): 364-372.

[^02GansingIntroduction_11]: Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri, *Empire*, Cambridge: Harvard
    University Press, 2000.

[^02GansingIntroduction_12]: Oliver Nachtwey, *Germany’s Hidden Crisis. Social Decline in the
    Heart of Europe*, London: Verso, 2018.
