---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# Everything We Build

## In Conversation: Aay Liparoto and Lorena Juan

*Feminist queer ‘spaces’ are often far more than just bars, just book
clubs, just dances, just sports teams, just magazines, or just
performances. They are sites of community building, sites of resistance,
sites of political organisation, sites of transformation, sites of
healthcare, sites of survival, and sites of knowledge creation. How can
we record and share these queer feminist practices in a meaningful way
for our communities? What can we learn from each other?*[^09LiparotoJuanEverythingWeBuild_1]

Multidisciplinary artist Aay Liparoto and their long-time
co-conspirator, curator Lorena Juan met in Berlin in 2011 and soon spent
their Friday nights discussing art and feminism around the kitchen
table. Within the frame of Liparoto’s collaborative project *Not Found
On* (2019–ongoing) and audio installation *no bodies welcome | all
bodies welcome* (created with HOT BODIES – CHOIR,[^09LiparotoJuanEverythingWeBuild_2] 2019), the pair
share thoughts on their joint interests in community building and
strategies for celebrating queer feminist knowledge both online and
‘IRL’.[^09LiparotoJuanEverythingWeBuild_3] 

Now based in Brussels, Aay Liparoto works with long-term performance as
a form of research in order to examine the power in the banal.
Liparoto’s output is predominately video, text and performance, using
accessible technology, personal digital archives and DIY strategies to
reflect on the mechanics of the everyday life. In her curatorial
practice, Lorena Juan works with experimental formats, public space, and
collaborative processes. She is a cofounder of artists’ collective and
online platform COVEN BERLIN, which aims to create an open sphere for
deconstructing assimilated social structures of sexuality and gender.
Their practices and research have solidified on common ground, although
their meetings are often held in cyberspace. 

**Lorena Juan:** Over the last decades, through the democratization of
digital technologies and the digitalization of society, we have seen how
social movements and political art have found new forms of expression,
community, and connection. Since its inception, the internet has been a
transformative space for artists, especially for those belonging to
groups that have been historically excluded or confined to the private
sphere. Queer and feminist activism has certainly found new tools in new
media. How do you see your practice and *Not Found On* in particular
within this genealogy?

**Aay Liparoto:** As an artist I engage with deconstructing the power
dynamics of everyday objects – I am a person with a body and a phone and
I rarely leave the house naked. Our daily life is saturated by new and
old technologies, tools that transform us and with which we coexist.
Clothes and mobile phones are technologies of bodily extension that we
use to code/signal to various publics. However, with phones, the scale
of the public is different. I am interested in actively using such
technologies to question how their materials produce behaviours and what
capacity to shift, disrupt and demystify we might have. 

This questioning led me to initiate *Not Found On,* a collaborative
project to create an online space to record, share, and value queer
feminist arts and social knowledge. The project is based on an open
source wiki structure, and has been designed, developed and written
through workshops with, by, and for queer feminist bodies. Through the
collective processes of thinking and making, there is an invitation to
question the culture and politics of the online platforms in which we
participate, the idea that ‘the internet in itself offers no guarantee
of transformation.’[^09LiparotoJuanEverythingWeBuild_4]

**LJ:** Was *Not Found On* born out of the urgency of creating an
alternative to Wikipedia for queer feminist knowledge sharing? 

**AL:** Initially I was invited to publish my book *Andrew Has His
Period* within the frame of an accessible archive, which came out of my
experiences of researching and struggling to gain access to media and
information in remote feminist archives due to their location, high
price, or being out of print. How to publish, value and share access was
pivotal. It seemed natural to look at Wikipedia’s recording; however I
soon realised that what I was proposing would not be eligible based on
their benchmarks for inclusion: a writing style with a ‘neutral
standpoint’, no original content, required notability and criteria of
verifiability.

I began applying these conditions to much of the culture, magazines,
spaces, and artists, I respect, read, and visit, and it became clear
that almost all of them would not be accepted, including whole
communities and networks across multiple cities. These are networks of
self-organized counter-publics evolved from the need to fill gaps in
mainstream publishing and programming. However, in order to be included
in Wikipedia, they would need the validation of mainstream media to be
acknowledged as legitimate. It was a reminder of the emptiness of the
statement ‘the free encyclopedia that anyone can edit.’[^09LiparotoJuanEverythingWeBuild_5] – In
reality, a space with rigid power structures and inherent race and
gender biases, where some types of knowledge are respected and others
aren’t.

Where do feminist queer bodies value and share knowledge created by our
communities? Facebook pages, tumblrs, reddit, email newsletters, their
own websites, archives, zines, bars, kitchen tables? What are the
politics of the spaces we use? Who owns the data and images collected?
How are our experiences regulated and shared?

**LJ:** Wiki technologies have been around for quite a while. Why should
we still use them?

**AL:** Wikis are not sexy. They are clunky, labour intensive and
totally have their limitations. Still, they are an open source tool that
enables co-writing among larger numbers of people and includes multiple
media formats: text, audio, and video. It is also stable and easy to
install your own version. And, crucially, it has a large community
sustaining the technology, which is necessary with a limited budget, for
the longevity of the project.

There is still the simple beauty of the visible history function,
transparency about the evolution of ideas through the evolving layers of
an entry. I stepped into this wiki world through the project and have
found it a good space to slow down, to step back from the seduction of
smooth operating sites and to become more aware of organising
structures. A learning and testing space, this slowness allows more time
to question what and why we want to share. 

In some ways the desire to create a space to document ‘queerness’,
something sticky and blurry, something essentially undefined within a
wiki is absurd. The *Not Found On* wiki desires to be more of a junction
box, collecting certain pieces of knowledge while also connecting out to
other sites, projects and networks. 

**LJ:** There is something inherently queer about collective work in the
arts, about defying the idea of the autonomy of the single author. Is
meeting in real life for collaborative co-writing sessions a big part of
*Not Found On*? 

**AL:** Meeting and working together is so vital in order to understand
our relationships to each other via digital technologies. Co-learning
and co-creating is essential to *Not Found On* as a feminist practice.
The project launched in March 2019 with a think-tank day with ten guests
who work around queer DIY publishing, activism and organising, such as
yourself (Lorena Juan), Mert Sen, Tyna Adebowale, Marnie Slater
and Karol Radziszewski. The aim was to discuss how to create a safer
online space for recording and sharing queer knowledge. There was also a
workshop by Just For The Record, a group that addresses ‘how gender is
represented in new media and writing/publishing tools like Wikipedia,
and what influence this has on the way history is recorded’.[^09LiparotoJuanEverythingWeBuild_6] The
event, hosted at WORM Rotterdam to coincide with International Women’s
Day, was really a catalyst point to flag concerns and for proposing
strategies. 

The project has been built through existing networks of DIY queer
feminist organisations over eleven subsequent workshops in Brussels,
Liverpool and Rotterdam. The site went live in May 2019 and has been
shaped by around ninety-five queer feminists, in particular social
designer Cristina Cochior and in various capacities, Laura Deschepper,
Priya Sharma, Carlos Marfil Rodriguez and Conway. *Not Found On* is an
intensive on-going process of co-learning, with everything built step
by-step via IRL workshops. Our most pressing focus is working with
different groups to test and adapt the input forms, interfaces, and
design accessibility.

There is an intense labour in collective work that requires time and
care and also allows for error and accountability. The desire to have a
physical community is something that has come up over and over again
in our workshops, and will remain at the project’s heart. We are still
seeking collaborators to work with us in defining the space further. 

**LJ:** Is your work with HOT BODIES – CHOIR an extension of this
practice?

**AL:** *no bodies welcome | all bodies welcome* made in collaboration
with HOT BODIES – CHOIR, is about the embodied experience of knowledge
and its transmission. The desire was to create a piece around this
research and methodology without directly exposing the *Not Found On*
platform, which has a specific public and intention.

Through a series of workshops we looked for a way to combine the writing
and singing practices of HOT BODIES – CHOIR in Brussels with the
co-writing of *Not Found On*. To find words and voice to together
acknowledge our interdependence with digital technology as queer
feminist bodies for information, work, sex, entrainment, communication,
social life, healthcare and combinations of them all. In *no bodies
welcome | all bodies welcome* we transmit a sticky mixture of
reflections on cyberspace and offer unsolicited advice sent directly
into your ear canals via an audio installation. 

**LJ:** Virtual space can change the habits of the subjects who inhabit
it and subsequently have an impact on the broader dynamics of social
production and reproduction. However, as Rosi Braidotti points out, in
times of great technological developments, Western society reaffirms its
traditional habits, especially the tendency to create hierarchies. In
what we know as ‘pink washing’, corporations appropriate the struggles
of queer bodies in order to obtain economic and social benefits. Which
strategies do you use in *Not Found On* to challenge this
commodification?

**AL:** There are a couple of aspects I want to touch on here: first,
the practical function and structure of the project *Not Found On*, and
second, the reliance of marginalized bodies on commercial spaces and the
idea of ‘identities’ going mainstream. 

The project comes out of a resistance to the neatly packaged
commodification of identities. It seeks to be a hub for recording a
multiplicity of voices in their own complexity and connecting to other
projects and people. On a practical level, we know what our server looks
like, where it is located and the people/politics that care for it. This
allows us to collectively run a community space, where we are able to
establish our practices, code of conduct, and content. The site itself
encourages tactics of obfuscation and won’t sell your data. 

From reddit groups on trans healthcare and queer city-based Facebook
groups to specific dating apps, there is now, as ever, a great need for
marginalized people to form counter-publics; to connect online and IRL
to people like us and seek the information we don’t find in other
spaces. But what does it mean to use these often ‘free’ spaces that
monetize our data? Friedman puts it well: ‘corporations seeking to
commodify user information have enclosed the so-called “internet
commons” by offering a devil’s bargain trading access to global networks
for individual privacy.’[^09LiparotoJuanEverythingWeBuild_7] We are allowing ‘our identities’ to be
sanitized, sold back to us at best, and exposing ourselves to real world
harm, at worst. Are we suffering from digital apathy or does the need to
connect to others just outweigh the time and energy required to question
these spaces?

I am cautious that, along with a greater presence of intersectional
feminist, queer and LGBTIA+ narratives in mainstream media, there has
been a rise in far-right politics across Europe and the USA and,
worryingly, an increase of hate crimes. Although one might think that
more visibility is a kin to breaking these power imbalances I ask: Who
is telling these narratives? Who is profiting from them? I am cynical of
feminism, decolonization, and queerness being ‘trends’. These are not
and never have been trends: they are urgencies, and as long as these
systems of oppression go on, there is a need to self-organise opposition
and find ways to build energy in our communities.

**LJ:** In questioning the spaces that we inhabit, the artwork of Tabita
Rezaire comes to mind. In *Afro Cyber Resistance* (2014), she draws
upon discourses of e-colonialism to show up the internet as a ‘white
space’. How do you see *Not Found On* in relationship to this? 

**AL:** What resonates in Tabita Rezaire’s work is the need for people
to register their own knowledge and embodied experience, such as in her
example of Wiki Africa, to resist being subjugated by the existing power
structures, now reproduced online. The work is a call to consciousness
and action.

*Not Found On* can’t and does not seek to be applied as a one-size-fits
all model. This platform comes out of the needs and desires of a
particular context: created in English, in Western Europe, and tied to
ideas of Western feminism, queerness, gender and LGBTIA+ narratives. We
acknowledge the rich and varying articulations of gender and sexuality
that exist globally and the lasting legacies of colonial laws still
enacted upon predominantly black and brown queer bodies.

In its conception, *Not Found On* suggests two significations: Firstly,
all that is not adequately recorded nor respected by historical and
mainstream canons. The narratives we were never told in schools, the
artists, thinkers, and achievements that were and are left out on the
basis of class, race, religion, gender and sexuality. Secondly, the
attempt of this space to house and connect diverse queer feminist
experiences, while ultimately knowing that it can never and should not
try to represent all.

*Not Found On* takes Flavia Dzodan’s scream ‘MY FEMINISM WILL BE
INTERSECTIONAL OR IT WILL BE BULLSHIT!’ as a founding statement. These
lines are just lip service unless participation, action, and critique
are applied. We seek to manipulate the tools and language of the site in
an attempt to not submit to established power dynamics for example by
looking for alternative ways to organise and search information, by
embracing non-standardised language, by asking users to offer a
‘politics of location’[^09LiparotoJuanEverythingWeBuild_8] statement, and by clearly stating our
limitations, where the project comes from and how we are funded. The
site itself invites you to be critical of the spaces you participate
including ours.

**LJ:** Radical queer and feminist offline spaces employ strategies to
create ‘safe spaces’. Can a virtual platform aspire to be a ‘safe
space’? If so, which protocols should be followed? 

**AL:** I feel that the question should always be: What is a safe space
and for whom? Regardless of whether off- or online, we can only ever
speak of a ‘safer space’ and never a ‘safe space’. Safer space is more
about the community and culture you build around a space which is an
active and on-going process. 

Our aim is to be at use for a specific public, but this of course is
tricky online where there can be no expectation of privacy. We prefer
not to appear in search engines, we ask not to be crawled and from our
community we ask not to be shared on social media. However, this is no
guarantee. It is crucial for us to make our community aware of the
structure we are participating in. For example, we make it clear that
you can register for an account without providing an email address or
legal name. Despite this, your IP address leaves a trace and you may be
identified by your location or name on an internet contract. 

We do not use categories in our data structure but define each entry via
an array of descriptors, some based on more literal properties such as
location or form; others on energy, mood and associations. We are
looking for alternative overlapping and subjective ways to find and
think about content and context. We are attempting to use the wiki
structure unconventionally to escape the toxicity that has been enacted
via taxonomy.

Currently we are small-scale by design, and opening up to people
personally via workshops. As the space grows there will be new
urgencies, with the tension between protection from vandalism and
reaching a wider audience. We will soon host *Not Found On* workshops
looking at existing social technical protocols among feminist and
LGBTQIA+ forums, private groups and archives. Seeking to collectively
address whether they deter people with a legitimate claim to the space,
asking how we can build community on *Not Found On* whilst addressing
privacy needs. 

**LJ:** For me *Not Found On* is about self-preservation and, at the
same time, embracing vulnerability. So it may not be so far away from
our initial encounters at the kitchen table and the desire to find
community.

**AL:** It so often starts in a kitchen, I think this might be the least
respected seat of knowledge but such a vital setting, especially for
othered bodies! The desire to self-organise and curate the spaces we
need is still so relevant, much as you do with [COVEN
BERLIN*.*](http://www.covenberlin.com/) While we want to develop direct
community in our local areas with people we know, I think it also goes
beyond connection as a purely social function – it’s about supportive
networks of knowledge. 

I believe collective recording is key to breaking the cycle of the
vibrant energies of people in the now only being ‘discovered’ and
celebrated 20 or 30 years later when they are no longer a threat to
systems in power. This silencing through lack of record in the public
domain makes it much harder for that knowledge to accumulate
intergenerationally.

*Not Found On* is one gesture towards changing that. We want to invite
queer feminist bodies to join us, to take time to grow and to be allowed
to fail. 

*‘Everything you own you’ve had to build on stolen ground but now we
build inwards. Deeper away from all pick up the stones and build with
us.’*[^09LiparotoJuanEverythingWeBuild_9]

[^09LiparotoJuanEverythingWeBuild_1]: Text from *Not Found On* introduction,
    2019.

[^09LiparotoJuanEverythingWeBuild_2]: HOT BODIES – CHOIR, Gérald Kurdian,
    <www.wearehotbodiesofthefuture.org>.

[^09LiparotoJuanEverythingWeBuild_3]: This conversation has been edited for print.

[^09LiparotoJuanEverythingWeBuild_4]: Elisabeth J. Friedman, *Interpreting the Internet: Feminist and
    Queer Counterpublics in Latin America*, Berkeley: University of
    California Press, 2016, p. 4.

[^09LiparotoJuanEverythingWeBuild_5]: See Wikipedia’s description on the main page,
    <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Main_Page>.

[^09LiparotoJuanEverythingWeBuild_6]: Just for the Record, <http://justfortherecord.space/>.

[^09LiparotoJuanEverythingWeBuild_7]: Friedman, *Interpreting the Internet*, p. 13.

[^09LiparotoJuanEverythingWeBuild_8]: Adrienne Rich, ‘Notes Toward a Politics of Location (1984)’, in
    *Blood, Bread, and Poetry: Selected Prose 1979-1985*, New York: W.W.
    Norton & Company, 1986, pp. 210-231.

[^09LiparotoJuanEverythingWeBuild_9]: Text from *Not Found On* co-writing session with 9 bodies,
    Liverpool, 2019.
