---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


#Author Biographies 

## Clemens Apprich

Clemens Apprich is assistant professor in media studies at the
University of Groningen and permanent fellow at the Centre for Digital
Cultures at Leuphana University of Lüneburg, where he is one of the
editors of *spheres*, an open peer-reviewed journal for digital
cultures. He is an affiliate of the Digital Democracies Group at Simon
Fraser University, Canada; the Global Emergent Media Lab at Concordia
University, Montreal; and the Brandenburg Centre for Media Studies at
the University of Potsdam. His current research deals with filter
algorithms and their application in data analysis as well as machine
learning methods. Apprich is the author of *Technotopia: A Media
Genealogy of Net Cultures* (Rowman & Littlefield International, 2017),
and, together with Wendy Chun, Hito Steyerl, and Florian Cramer,
co-authored *Pattern Discrimination* (University of Minnesota
Press/meson press, 2019).

## Johanna Bruckner 

Johanna Bruckner is an artist, with recent solo exhibitions and
performances at Kunstraum Niederösterreich, Vienna, the Centre d'Art
Contemporain Genève, and Migros Museum für Gegenwartskunst, Zurich.
Group shows include at Haus der Kulturen der Welt and KW Institute for
Contemporary Art in Berlin, and the 57th Venice Biennale. She is
currently an artist-in-residence at the Swiss Institute in Rome. 

## Daphne Dragona

Daphne Dragona is a curator and writer based in Berlin. She was part of
the curatorial team of transmediale from 2015 until 2019, with a focus
on the conference and workshop program. Her work engages with artistic
practices and methodologies that question contemporary forms of power.
Her topics of interest include: the controversies of connectivity, the
promises of the commons, the challenges of artistic subversion, the
instrumentalization of play, care and empathy, and the potential of
kin-making technologies in the time of climate crisis. She has curated
exhibitions at Onassis Stegi and the National Museum of Contemporary Art
in Athens; LABoral, Gijón; Aksioma, Ljubljana; Alta Technología Andina,
Lima; and Le Lieu unique, Nantes. Her articles have been published in
books, journals, magazines, and exhibition catalogs by Springer,
Sternberg Press, and Leonardo Electronic Almanac, among others. She
holds a PhD from the Faculty of Communication and Media Studies,
University of Athens.

## [Kristoffer Gansing](https://transmediale.de/content/kristoffer-gansing) 

Kristoffer Gansing is a curator, writer, and researcher living in
Berlin, where between 2011 and 2020 he has been the artistic director of
nine editions of transmediale. Intersecting art, theory, and technology,
Gansing’s writing and curation has a post-digital outlook, where
digitalization has become part of everyday life. His PhD ‘Transversal
Media Practices’ dealt with how media-archaeological art practices
reconfigure linear conceptions of technological development, and was
published by Malmö University Press in 2013. He co-edited *across &
beyond: A transmediale Reader on Post-digital Practices, Concepts, and
Institutions*, with Ryan Bishop, Jussi Parikka, and Elvia Wilk
(Sternberg Press, 2016). Gansing previously worked with the artist-run
TV channel *tv-tv* in Copenhagen, and as co-director of the media art
festival The Art of the Overhead, devoted to the near-forgotten medium
of the overhead projector.

## Lorena Juan

In her curatorial practice, Lorena Juan works with experimental formats,
public space, and collaboration in the frame of queer feminist
collectivities. Her most recent projects were presented at Kunstraum
Kreuzberg/Bethanien (‘Capitalo, Chthulu, and a Much Hotter Compost
Pile’, 2018), nGbK neue Gesellschaft für bildende Kunst (‘Lucky’, 2018),
and Schwules Museum\* (‘Extra+Terrestrial’, 2019) in Berlin. In 2019,
she was part of the jury for the research stipends for artists and
curators of the Berliner Senat and curator-in-residence at Rupert,
Vilnius. Juan is part of the curatorial working group for ‘Kunst im
Untergrund 2020/2021’, organized by nGbK. She is the co-founder and
curatorial lead of the queer feminist collective and online platform
COVEN BERLIN.

## Aay Liparoto

Multidisciplinary artist Aay Liparoto uses long-term performance as a
form of research to examine the power of the banal. Their output is
mainly in video, text, and performance, working with accessible
technology, personal digital archives, and DIY strategies to reflect on
the mechanics of everyday life. In their solo and collaborative practice
they are focused on feminist co-authorship as a method for resisting the
over-simplification of narratives around historically marginalized
voices.

## Geert Lovink

Geert Lovink is a Dutch media theorist, internet critic, and author of
Uncanny Networks (2002), Dark Fiber (2002), My First Recession (2003),
Zero Comments (2007), Networks Without a Cause (2012), Social Media
Abyss (2016), Organization after Social Media (with Ned Rossiter, 2018),
and Sad by Design (2019). He founded the Institute of Network Cultures
at Amsterdam University of Applied Sciences in 2014. The institute
organizes conferences, publications, and research networks such as Video
Vortex: Moving Image Beyond YouTube, Society of the Query: Web Search
and Search Engines, Unlike Us (alternative social media), Critical Point
of View (Wikipedia), and MoneyLab (digital economy in the arts).

## [Alessandro Ludovico](https://transmediale.de/content/alessandro-ludovico) 

Alessandro Ludovico is a researcher and artist, editor-in-chief of
*Neural* magazine since 1993. He received his PhD in English and media
from Anglia Ruskin University, Cambridge (UK). He is associate professor
at the Winchester School of Art, University of Southampton. Ludovico has
published and edited several books, and has lectured internationally.
With Paolo Cirio he co-authored the award-winning ‘Hacking Monopolism
Trilogy’ of artworks (*Google Will Eat Itself*, *Amazon Noir*, *Face to
Facebook*). http://neural.it. 

## Aymeric Mansoux

Aymeric Mansoux has been messing around with computers and networks for
far too long. He was a founding member of server-based collective GOTO10
(*FLOSS+Art* anthology, Puredyne distro, make art festival). Recent
collaborations include: *The SKOR Codex*, an archive about the
impossibility of archiving; *What Remains*, an 8-bit video game about
the manipulation of public opinion and whistleblowing for the 1985
Nintendo Entertainment System; and LURK, a server infrastructure for
discussions around cultural freedom, new media art, and net culture.
Aymeric received his PhD from the Centre for Cultural Studies,
Goldsmiths, University of London in 2017, for his investigation of the
decay of cultural diversity and techno-legal forms of social
organization within free and open-source cultural practices. He
currently runs the Experimental Publishing (XPUB) master course at the
Piet Zwart Institute, Rotterdam. https://bleu255.com/\~aymeric.

## Rachel O'Dwyer

Rachel O'Dwyer is a lecturer in digital cultures at the National College
of Art and Design, Dublin. She was formerly a research fellow at Connect
– Centre for Future Networks and Communications at Trinity College
Dublin, and a Fulbright scholar in collaboration with the Future of
Money project at the University of California, Irvine. Her research
focuses on the intersection of cultural and digital economies, in
particular networks and digital payments, surveillance capitalism and
its resistance. She is curator of the Dublin Art and Technology
Association and co-editor of *Neural* magazine. She has had articles
published by *London Review of Books*, *Journal of Cultural Economy*,
*Convergence: The International Journal of Research into New Media
Technologies*, *Neural*, *Longreads*, the Institute of Network Cultures,
and MIT Press.

## Luiza Prado de O. Martins  

Luiza Prado de O. Martins is an artist and researcher whose work engages
with material and visual cultures through decolonial and queer
theories. She is particularly interested in technologies of birth
control and their entanglements with the colonial hierarchies of gender,
race, ethnicity, class, and nationality. Her current research project,
‘A Topography of Excesses’, examines the transmission of Indigenous and
folk knowledges of herbal birth control in Brazil as a decolonizing
practice of radical care.

## Roel Roscam Abbing

Roel Roscam Abbing is an artist and researcher whose work deals with the
issues and cultures surrounding networked computation. He engages with
themes such as network infrastructures, the politics of technology, and
DIY approaches. He is a doctoral candidate in interaction design at
Malmö University.

## [Femke Snelting](https://transmediale.de/content/femke-snelting)

Femke Snelting works as an artist and designer, developing projects at
the intersection of design, feminism, and free software. She explores
how digital tools and practices might co-construct each other. She has
been a member of Constant, a nonprofit, artist-run association for art
and media based in Brussels since 2003.

## Florian Wüst

Florian Wüst has been the film and video curator of transmediale since
2016. As an artist, film curator, and publisher he deals with social and
economic progress in modernity as well as with urban political issues.
He has curated film programs for international art institutions,
cinemas, and festivals. Wüst is co-editor of the DVD *The Modern City.
Film essays on the new urbanity of the 1950s and 60s* (2015), and
co-founder of the journal series *Berlin Journals–On the History and
Present State of the City*.
